---
layout: post
title: "Abstract Data Types in C"
date: 2019-08-31
author: yubbit
categories: ['Programming']
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Since Term 2 is coming to an end and I'm not sure if I'll have access to all my
lecture notes from this term, I'm putting my biggest takeaway from COMP9024 on
this post.

An abstract data type is a data type defined by the functions that can be
performed on it. That is, the only way to interact with the underlying memory
of an abstract data type is by using functions that were created specifically
to interact with it in a particular way. It can be viewed as a way of
employing encapsulation in C.

To implement an abstract data type, we need at least three files. For this
example, I'll be using a sample implementation of a stack.

```c
/* main.c */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

#include "stack.h"

int main(void) {
    int arr[5] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
    Stack s;

    s = initializeStack();
    for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
        printf("Pushing %d onto the stack.\n", arr[i]);
        push(arr[i], s);
    }

    printf("isEmpty returns %d.\n", isEmpty(s));

    for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
        printf("Popped %d from stack.\n", pop(s));
    }

    printf("isEmpty returns %d.\n", isEmpty(s));

    return EXIT_SUCCESS;
}
```

```c
/* stack.h */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

typedef struct adt *Stack;

Stack initializeStack(void);
Stack freeStack(Stack);
void  push(int, Stack);
int   pop(Stack);
int   isEmpty(Stack);
```

```c
/* stack.c */
#include "stack.h"

#define MAX 1000

struct adt {
    int array[MAX];
    int top;
};

Stack initializeStack(void) {
    Stack s;
    s = malloc(sizeof(struct adt));
    s->top = -1;
    return s;
}

Stack freeStack(Stack s) {
    free(s);
    return s;
}

void push(int num, Stack s) {
    s->array[++s->top] = num;
}

int pop(Stack s) {
    return s->array[s->top--];
}

int isEmpty(Stack s) {
    return s->top < 0;
}
```

So what's going on here?

Essentially, the `main.c` procedure only has access to everything defined in the
header file `stack.h`. It can call all of the functions defined in the header
file, but the only thing it knows about `Stack` is that it's an alias for a 
pointer to some struct. It doesn't actually know what's in that struct, so it
can't navigate any of its fields since it isn't aware of how the memory's
allocated. Consequently, the main procedure cannot interact with a struct in
any manner, not even to allocate memory, except through functions defined in 
`stack.c`.

Meanwhile, in `stack.c`, where the functions actually *are* defined, all the 
functions defined in it are aware that `Stack` is a pointer to some struct 
called `adt`, and all these functions are aware that `adt` has the fields `top`
and `array`. This means that they're all able to read and store data into the
`Stack` data type. Becase of the limitations imposed by this scheme on `main.c`,
even memory allocation has to be defined here in `stack.c`.

ADTs have been immensely useful in keeping my code organized for the course,
and it was really interesting to have learned that encapslation *was* possible
in C, beyond what I'd learned from reading K&R. 